Adopted on 23 November 2021
Key  facts
UNESCO’s
 Recommendation on  
 the Ethics
 of Artificial
Intelligence
Supported by:

2Published in 2023 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization, 7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP , France
 
© UNESCO 2023
SHS/2023/PI/H/1
 
All rights reserved.
This publication is available in Open Access under the Attribution-
NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO) license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/igo/). By using 
the content of this publication, the users accept to be bound by the 
terms of use of the UNESCO Open Access Repository (www.unesco.
org/open-access/terms-use-ccbyncsa-en).
Cover photo: metamorworks / Shutterstock.com
Graphic design (Cover & Layout): Sara Rienda de la Mota 
Printed by UNESCO 
Printed in France

3 2Table of Contents
08
2A Human Rights Approach to AI·Ten core principles lay out a Human Rights-centred 
Approach to the Ethics of AI·Message from Gabriela Ramos
Assistant Director-General, Social and Human Sciences, UNESCO04·
Why is a Global Recommendation needed?
1· ·06
3
Actionable Policies·Key policy areas make clear arenas where Member States 
can make strides towards responsible developments in AI·12
16
4 Implementing the Recommendation· ·
5
Join us· ·17

4MESSAGE FROM GABRIELA RAMOS
Assistant Director-General, Social and Human Sciences, UNESCO
With its unique mandate, UNESCO’s Social 
and Human Sciences Sector has led the 
international effort to ensure that science 
and technology develop with strong ethical 
guardrails for decades. 
Be it on genetic research, climate change, or 
scientific research, we have delivered global 
standards to maximize the benefits of the 
scientific discoveries, while minimizing the 
downside risks, ensuring they contribute to 
a more inclusive, sustainable, and peaceful 
world. We have also identified frontier 
challenges in areas such as the ethics of 
neurotechnology, on climate engineering, 
and the internet of things. This has been 
done with the unvaluable support of our 
expert committees, the Committee on the 
Ethics of Science and Technology and the 
International Bioethics Committee.
In no other field is the ethical compass is 
more relevant than in artificial intelligence. 
These general-purpose technologies are 
re-shaping the way we work, interact, 
and live. The world is set to change at a 
pace not seen since the deployment of 
the printing press six centuries ago. AI 
technology brings major benefits in many 
areas, but without the ethical guardrails, 
it risks reproducing real world biases 
and discrimination, fueling divisions and 
threatening fundamental human rights and 
freedoms. AI business models are highly 
concentrated in just few countries and 
a handful of firms — usually developed in male-dominated teams, without the 
cultural diversity that characterizes our 
world. Contrast this with the fact that half 
of the world’s population still can’t count 
on a stable internet connection. 
To correct this, under the leadership of 
UNESCO’s Director-General Audrey Azoulay, 
and a clear mandate by our Member 
States, we elaborated the world’s most 
comprehensive international framework 
to shape the development and use of AI 
technologies. The Recommendation on 
the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence was 
adopted by acclamation by 193 Member 
States at UNESCO’s General Conference 
in November 2021. This comprehensive 
instrument was two years in the making 
UNESCO / C. Alix

5 4and the product of the broadest global 
consultation process of expert, developers, 
and other stakeholders from all around 
the world. It was an honour to spearhead 
this effort and support Member States in 
accomplishing this important task. 
The Recommendation emphasizes who 
should be in control of these technologies. 
It makes a strong call to governments 
around the world to establish the necessary 
institutional and legal frameworks to 
govern these technologies and ensure they 
contribute to the public good. It clearly 
signals the end of the “self-regulatory 
model” that has prevailed, prioritizing 
commercial and geopolitical objectives 
over people for too long. 
The Recommendation establishes a  
set of values in line with the promotion 
and protection of human rights, human 
dignity, and environmental sustainability. 
It advances essential principles such as 
transparency, accountability, and the rule 
of law online. 
It also includes concrete policy chapters 
that call for better governance of data, 
gender equality, and important aspects 
of AI applications on education, culture, 
labour markets, the environment, 
communication and information, health 
and social well-being, and the economy. 
Unlike other international instruments, 
the Recommendation includes monitoring 
and evaluation chapters and means for implementation in the form of a Readiness 
Assessment and the Ethical Impact 
Assessment to ensure real change on the 
ground. 
UNESCO is now focused on implementing 
the Recommendation, and we are piloting 
the tools, establishing regional roundtables 
for peer learning, and development 
networks of partners around the world, 
such as the AI Ethics Experts Without  
Borders network and the Women 4 Ethical 
AI network. The first Global Forum on the 
Ethics of Artificial Intelligence took place 
in the Czech Republic in the context of the 
country’s Presidency of the Council of the 
European Union, and work is being done 
to launch the Observatory on the Ethics 
of AI. Given that the private sector is the 
major contributor to these developments, 
engagement with leading firms has also 
been established, as well as interactions 
with the civil society. It is clear that 
ensuring ethical AI is everybody’s business. 
This level of commitment and engagement 
from Member States, the private sector, 
civil society, and academic institutions 
is a sign that the ethical framework we 
have developed was long overdue. Now it 
is in our hands to realize its full potential 
and ensure that the new era of AI delivers 
the progress and solutions that we are all 
hoping for. 
Gabriela Ramos
      @gabramosp

6The rapid rise in artificial intelligence (AI) has created many opportunities 
globally, from facilitating healthcare diagnoses to enabling human 
connections through social media and creating labour efficiencies through 
automated tasks.
However, these rapid changes also raise profound ethical concerns. These 
arise from the potential AI systems have to embed biases, contribute to 
climate degradation, threaten human rights and more. Such risks associated 
with AI have already begun to compound on top of existing inequalities, 
resulting in further harm to already marginalised groups.
Recognising the urgency of this challenge, UNESCO published the first-
ever global standard on AI ethics – the ‘Recommendation on the Ethics of 
Artificial Intelligence’ (hereafter “the Recommendation”). This framework 
was adopted by all 193 Member States in November 2021. 
The protection of human rights and dignity is the cornerstone of the 
Recommendation, based on the advancement of fundamental principles 
such as transparency and fairness, always remembering the importance 
of human oversight of AI systems.
However, what makes the Recom -
mendation exceptionally applicable 
are its extensive Policy Action Areas, 
which allow policymakers to translate 
the core values and principles into ac -
tion with respect to data governance, 
environment and ecosystems, gender, 
education and research, and health 
and social wellbeing, among many 
other spheres.WHY A GLOBAL RECOMMENDATION IS NEEDED? 
BREAKTHROUGH PROVISION
A Dynamic Understanding of AI
The Recommendation interprets AI 
broadly as systems with the ability 
to process data in a way which 
resembles intelligent behaviour. 
This is crucial as the rapid pace of 
technological change would quickly 
render any fixed, narrow definition 
outdated, and make future-proof 
policies infeasible.
1

7 6
ENSURING DIVERSITY
AND INCLUSIVENESS
Central to the Recommendation are four core values which lay the 
foundations for AI systems that work for the good of humanity, individuals, 
societies and the environment:
VALUES
2
ENVIRONMENT AND
ECOSYSTEM FLOURISHING
4
LIVING IN PEACEFUL, JUST , AND 
INTERCONNECTED
SOCIETIES
1
 2
RESPECT , PROTECTION AND
PROMOTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS 
AND FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS 
AND HUMAN DIGNITY 
1
3
ENSURING DIVERSITY
AND INCLUSIVENESS

8
2 A HUMAN RIGHTS APPROACH TO AI
2 SAFETY AND SECURITY 
Unwanted harms (safety risks) 
as well as vulnerabilities to attack 
(security risks) should be avoided 
and addressed by AI actors.3 RIGHT TO PRIVACY AND 
DATA PROTECTION 
Privacy must be protected and 
promoted throughout the AI lifecycle. 
Adequate data protection frameworks  
should also be established.
KEY CONCEPT
AI actors and the AI life cycle
AI actors are any actors (natural 
or legal persons) involved in any 
stage of the AI life cycle, ranging 
from research, design, and 
development to deployment 
and use, including maintenance, 
operation, trade, financing, 
monitoring and evaluation, end-of-
use, disassembly and termination.Ten core principles lay out a human-rights centred approach to the Ethics of AI
1 PROPORTIONALITY AND DO NO 
HARM 
The use of AI systems must not go 
beyond what is necessary to achieve 
a legitimate aim. Risk assessment 
should be used to prevent harms 
which may result from such uses.BREAKTHROUGH PROVISION
No use of AI for social scoring or 
mass surveillance
The Recommendation is the first 
international normative instrument 
that contains a provision against 
using AI systems for social scoring 
and mass surveillance purposes.
CASE 1
Up close and personal
The data that we share online can 
have an impact on our individual 
privacy, often unbeknownst to 
us. Individuals’ behaviour online, 
including abstract information 
such as patterns of social media 
likes and scrolling speeds, may 
be modelled and used as a 
basis for targeted advertising or 
behavioural manipulation.

9 8
SeventyFour / Shutterstock.com5 RESPONSIBILITY AND
ACCOUNTABILITY
AI systems should be auditable and 
traceable. There should be oversight, 
impact assessment, audit and due 
diligence mechanisms in place to 
avoid conflicts with human rights 
norms and threats to environmental 
wellbeing.
CASE 2 Automated rejection
When applying for a loan, it is 
possible that your bank uses 
AI to make an automated as -
sessment of your finances and 
determine if your application 
will be approved. If these deci-
sions are taken without human 
oversight and accountability, 
the consequences can be sig-
nificant. First, an AI system that 
is not checked by a human may 
make a mistake. Second, there 
is no clear appeals process if 
there is nobody who can take 
ultimate responsibility for the 
decision.4 MUL TI-STAKEHOLDER AND 
ADAPTIVE GOVERNANCE   
AND COLLABORATION
International law and national 
sovereignty must be respected in 
the use of data, meaning States 
can regulate the data generated 
within or passing through their 
territories. Additionally, participation 
of diverse stakeholders is necessary 
for inclusive approaches to AI 
governance.

10
7 HUMAN OVERSIGHT AND 
DETERMINATION 
Member States should ensure 
that AI systems do not displace 
ultimate human responsibility and 
accountability.6 TRANSPARENCY AND
EXPLAINABILITY
The ethical deployment of AI systems 
depends on their transparency 
and explainability. For example, 
people should be made aware 
when a decision is informed by 
AI. The level of transparency and 
explainability should be appropriate 
to the context, as there may be 
tensions between transparency and 
explainability and other principles 
such as privacy, safety and security.  
KEY CONCEPT
Explainability
The term ‘black box’ has been 
used to describe AI wwsystems 
which are opaque and difficult to 
interpret. ‘Explainability’ requires 
that the logic behind algorithmic 
decision-making can be fully 
interpreted by experts and that 
this logic can be explained to users 
in accessible language.8 SUSTAINABILITY  
AI technologies should be as -
sessed against their impacts on ‘sus -
tainability’, understood as a set of 
constantly evolving goals including 
those set out in the UN’s Sustainable 
Development Goals. 
9 AWARENESS AND LITERACY
Public understanding of AI and 
data should be promoted through 
open and accessible education, 
civic engagement, digital skills 
and AI ethics training, media and 
information literacy.  


11 10
Wazzkii / Shutterstock.comKEY CONCEPT Machine 
learning
Machine learning is an application 
of AI that enables systems to learn 
from data and to improve without 
being explicitly programmed, thus 
improving their accuracy over time.10 FAIRNESS AND
NON-DISCRIMINATION
AI actors should promote social justice, 
fairness, and non-discrimination while 
taking an inclusive approach to ensure 
AI’s benefits are accessible to all.  
Accuracy for 
darker-skin 
individuals60.5 % 73 %
Accuracy for 
lighter-skin 
individualsCASE 3
More than meets the eye
Machine learning algorithms can be 
biased, often performing worse for 
certain sub-groups defined by protected 
attributes. This has been shown to 
be the case in diabetic retinopathy  
diagnostics:Modified from Burlina P., Joshi,  N., Paul, W., Pacheco  
K. D., and Bressler, N.M. (2021). Addressing artificial 
intelligence bias in retinal diagnostics.

12
3ACTIONABLE POLICIES
Key policy areas make clear arenas where Member States can make strides towards 
responsible developments in AI
While values and principles are crucial to establishing a basis for any ethical 
AI framework, recent movements in AI ethics have emphasised the need to 
move beyond high-level principles and toward practical strategies. 
The Recommendation does just this by setting out eleven key areas for policy 
actions, as summarised in the figure below. In this booklet, we explore five of 
these in greater depth.

13 12
POLICY
AREAS
02
ECONOMY AND LABOUR
Member States should consi-
der and attempt to regulate the 
impact of AI systems on the la -
bour market. AI-related studies 
should be made a core skill at 
all educational levels to help 
close the skill gap. It will boost 
market competition and ensure 
consumer protection on a na-
tional and international scale.
10BREAKTHROUGH PROVISION
Preventing harm
The Recommendation stresses 
that AI governance cannot stop 
once risks and impacts have been 
identified. Instead, all identified 
harms must be investigated and 
addressed so that impacted  
communities have the right to 
redress .
DATA POLICY 
Member States should implement 
mechanisms for effective data 
governance strategies to ensure 
individual privacy while ensuring 
adequate data collection and 
means to regulate its use.
BREAKTHROUGH 
PROVISION
Data for training
The Recommendation prompts 
and facilitates the use of quality 
and robust datasets for the 
training, development, and use 
of AI. This includes the creation 
of gold standard data sets or 
open and trust-worthy datasets.ETHICAL GOVERNANCE AND 
STEWARDSHIP
AI governance mechanisms should 
be inclusive, transparent, multidisci -
plinary, multilateral and multi-stake -
holder. In other words, communities 
impacted by AI must be actively in -
volved in its governance in addition 
to experts across a range of discipli -
nes. Additionally, governance must 
extend beyond mere recommen -
dations to include anticipation, 
enforcement and redress. 

14
EDUCATION AND
RESEARCH
Member States should provide 
adequate AI literacy education 
to the public, including awa -
reness programmes on data. 
In doing so, the participation 
of marginalised groups should 
be prioritised. Member States 
should also encourage research 
initiatives on ethical AI.
BREAKTHROUGH
PROVISION
Ethics skills
In the Recommendation, AI 
ethics, communication and 
teamwork skills are recognised 
as priorities alongside other 
widely recognised skills such 
as basic literacy, numeracy, 
coding and digital skills.BREAKTHROUGH 
PROVISION
Converging technologies
Emerging technologies are 
converging with one another, 
creating distinct ethical con -
cerns. The Recommendation 
includes provisions for such 
convergence, including neu -
rotechnology and brain-com -
puter interfaces.HEAL TH AND SOCIAL 
WELLBEING  
Member States should aim to 
deploy AI to improve health 
and tackle global health risks. 
AI in healthcare and mental 
healthcare should be regulated 
to be safe, effective, efficient and 
medically proven. Additionally, 
Member States should encoura -
ge research into the impact of AI 
on mental health and wellbeing.
Ruslana Iurchenko / Shutterstock.com

15 14GENDER 
Member States should maximise 
the potential AI has to contribute to 
gender equality while preventing any 
potential for AI to exacerbate gen -
der gaps. There should be dedicated 
funds for policies which support wo -
men and girls to make sure they are 
not left out. For example, investment 
for women in STEM careers. 
ENVIRONMENT AND 
ECOSYSTEMS 
Member States and businesses 
should assess direct and indi -
rect environmental impacts of 
AI systems, including their car -
bon footprint, energy consump -
tion and raw material extrac -
tion. Where necessary, Member 
States should also introduce 
incentives to ensure AI solutions 
are used to support the predic-
tion, prevention, control and 
mitigation of climate-related 
problems.
Modified from Strubell, E., Ganesh, A., and  
McCallum, A. (2020). Energy and policy 
considerations for modern deep learning 
research.CASE 4 Invisible biases, 
visible inequalities
AI may be trained on personnel 
datasets that represent pre-
existing human hiring biases, 
for example featuring a strong 
male skew. This will result in 
AI-systems which replicate male 
biases.20% more 
men than 
women 
received a 
Facebook 
ad for STEM 
careers
CASE 5
Power hungry algorithms
Many computations are needed to train 
large AI models based on big data sets. 
For instance, a common AI training 
model can emit more than 626,000 
pounds of CO2 equivalent - about five 
times the lifetime emission of the 
average car - including the manufacture 
of the car itself (Strubell et al, 2019).  Lambrecht, A., & Tucker, C. E. (2019). Algorithmic 
bias? An empirical study into apparent gender-based 
discrimination in the display of STEM career ads. 
Management Science, 65(7), pp. 2966-81.

16There is still a long way to go to provide Member States with actionable 
resources that ensure the effective implementation of the Recommendation. 
For this reason, UNESCO will develop two practical methodologies:
4IMPLEMENTING THE RECOMMENDATION
1. READINESS ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY (RAM)
Description:
The RAM is designed to help assess whether Member States are 
prepared to effectively implement the Recommendation. 
The RAM may address questions such as:
• Are laws in place to regulate AI? 
• Does the national infrastructure support the accessibility of AI 
technologies?
Purpose: 
This methodology will help Member States identify their status of 
preparedness and provide a basis for UNESCO to custom-tailor its 
capacity-building support. It may also be used to help Member States 
develop a roadmap towards ethical development and use of AI.

17 16
2. ETHICAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT (EIA)
Description:
EIA is a structured process which operationalises the Recommendation 
by helping AI project teams, in collabouration with the affected 
communities, to identify and assess the impacts an AI system may 
have. 
The EIA may address questions such as:
• Who is most likely to be adversely affected by this AI system? 
• What form will these impacts take? 
• What can be done to prevent these harms and have resources 
been allocated to this harm prevention?
Purpose: 
EIA provides an opportunity to reflect on the potential impacts of 
an AI project and to identify the needed harm prevention actions.

18
5JOIN US
Taken together, these values, principles, policy action areas, and practical 
methodologies of the Recommendation provide guidance to Member States 
on how to foster responsible AI innovation and equitable distribution of its 
benefits. UNESCO is working with governments, the private sector, academic 
institutions, and civil society organizations to translate the Recommendation 
into policies and actions. The multidimensional implementation strategy 
includes such elements as:
• Global Observatory on the Ethics of AI, an innovative digital platform 
serving as a one-stop-shop for the latest analysis on the ethical develop- 
ment and use of AI around the world, and for the knowledge generated 
through the implementation of the Recommendation in different 
countries.
• Global Forum on Ethics of AI, a high-level annual event to advance the 
state-of-the-art knowledge of the challenges raised by AI technologies 
and to facilitate peer-to-peer learning among governments and other 
stakeholders.
• AI Ethics Experts Without Borders (AIEB) network, a flexible facility 
of experts for deployment in Member States on needs basis to assist 
in the implementation of the Recommendation and the application of 
the capacity-building tools.
• Women for AI Ethics (W4AIEthics) network, a platform for influential 
women leaders in industry, government, and civil society, driving trans- 
formations towards gender equality in and through AI.
Stay tuned for the developments on these initiatives by visiting the website 
of the Recommendation (www.unesco.org/artificial-intelligence). If you 
wish to be involved in these initiatives, please contact us at ai-ethics@
unesco.org.

19 18This brochure is a summary of "Recommendation 
on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence".
For more information and a more in-depth look at 
the recommendation can be found by clicking on 
the following link or by scanning the QR code.

Follow us 
@UNESCO #AI #AIEthicsSocial and Human Sciences Sector
7 Place de Fontenoy
75007 Paris, France
  ai-ethics@unesco.org
  on.unesco.org/EthicsAI